{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww19100\viewh7900\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs36 \cf0 These are codes that don't fit neatly into any other categories.\
\

\b all2way
\b0 \
	This code changes all the values in the last column in a dot file to 2, getting rid of any information about how many species are involved in that alignment. This is so that we can test whether or not adding more aligned species actually helps.\
	The only command line argument is the dot file to be edited. The new dot file is sent to standard out. For example:\
all2way SM_25.dot > SM_25_2way.dot\
\

\b getevidence\
	
\b0 This code takes the full stk output by one of the generators and gives only the evidence and alignment lines. It can remove some of the evidence to simulate that fact that some of the alignments and evidence may not be complete.\
	The command line arguments are: the generator output, the phylogenetic tree for crate, the number of evidence lines, the names of the evidence lines, the probability that a gene is included in each evidence line, the number of aligned species, the names of the aligned species lines, the probability that a given gene is aligned in a row. For example: \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab560\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf2 \CocoaLigature0 getevidence genout_L1utr_trans_strands.stk "#=GF NH (A1:.1,A2:.1,A3:.1,A4:.1,((B1:.1)B:.1,(((C1:.1)C:.1,(D1:.1)D:.1)CD:.1)ABCD:.1)AB:.1)A;" 4 A1 A2 A3 A4 1 1 1 1 3 B C D 1 1 1 > species4.stk\cf0 \CocoaLigature1 \
\

\b parseeval\

\b0 	This code pull out information of interest from the output of evaluate_gtf.pl (part of eval). It adds a line with the specified information.\
	The command line arguments are: eval output file, file to add to, line where the first piece of information, column (tab, space delimited) where that information is, rows and columns for the rest of the information to be added. For example: \
\cf2 \CocoaLigature0 parseeval evalout_3 exonsensitivity_3 79 2 79 3 11 3 12 3 > garbage\
\

\b retreestk\
	
\b0 This code removes the tree from an stk and replaces it with a new one. The command line arguments are: the old stk, the new tree. For example:\
retreestk old.stk \cf0 "#=GF NH (A1:.1,A2:.1,A3:.1,A4:.1,((B1:.1)B:.1,(((C1:.1)C:.1,(D1:.1)D:.1)CD:.1)ABCD:.1)AB:.1)A;"\cf2 \
\
}